---
title: "Working From Home: A Retrospective"
date: 2014-09-18T12:57:32Z
tags: 
  - "work from home"
aliases:
  - "posts/2014-09-15-working-from-home-retrospective/"
---

I've spent the past eight months working from home thanks to some great support
from my [employer](http://www.vendasta.com), allowing me to support my wife and
children and still contribute as a meaningful employee. Working from home with
four small children and a loving and supportive wife has brought its fair share
of both challenges and delights. This post will describe the working from home
experience and the lessons I've learned along the way.

<!--more-->

## Personal Productivity

Without a doubt my personal productivity went up. Working from home meant fewer
distractions, noise and interruptions. VendAsta follows an open office plan
which can be great for ad-hoc communication but terrible for worker satisfaction
and personal productivity. In fact, a recent New Yorker article summarizing the
issue ([The Open-Office
        Trap](http://www.newyorker.com/business/currency/the-open-office-trap))
details numerous studies showing that open office plans are detrimental to
productivity and satisfaction at work. In one study, researchers from the
University of Calgary found that moving to an open office design is "negatively
related to workersâ€™ satisfaction with their physical environment and perceived
productivity". In another, Researchers at the University of Sidney found that
[open office plans have the lowest level of worker
satisfaction](http://theconversation.com/open-plan-offices-attract-highest-levels-of-worker-dissatisfaction-study-18246)
stating that "the disadvantages brought by noise disruption were bigger than the
predicted benefits of increased interaction".

My experience working from home confirmed these findings and I found that the
decreasing number of interruptions meant I could perform more and better work in
less time. 

## Team Communication

Team communication suffered. At VendAsta, we practice [agile development using
scrum](http://scrummethodology.com/) with all of the encompassing roles and
responsibilities. As a team member my role is to estimate stories in the
backlog, commit to a set number of stories per sprint, and to execute on those
stories during the sprint. When the stories were written with careful business
analysis and clear expectations of the acceptance criteria I felt no discernable
difference between working from home and working remotely. When the stories were
written with vague acceptance criteria or without careful thought of the
business implications it was significantly harder to contribute to team
productivity. Our usual approach in this case is to get together as a team in an
ad-hoc meeting to hash out the details of the particular story so that work on
it can resume. Unfortunately, even with modern video chat, screen sharing and
other remote working tools, communicating to a group of people is very difficult
as a remote employee. There is just no substitute to sitting together in the
same room working out a problem on a shared white board.

## Work-Life Balance

The difference in work-life balance is difficult to analyze. I'll start with the
biggest and most glaring postive -- I was home and helpful to our family during
breakfast, lunch, and dinner for almost a year. You really can't over value how
important that is to a young family. Living in a small city I don't have a very
long commute but the difference between a 20 minute commute and no commute at
all is striking. Being around for lunch or to help put a child to sleep. Just
being in the house so my wife could grab some groceries while everyone was
napping. All of these minor benefits add up to really make the experience of
raising our children that much easier.

## Guilt

Working from home with my wife and children in the same house meant I was always
aware of the sheer pile of *work* my wife was doing each day to help our family
-- while I had the much easier task of sitting at a computer typing on a
keyboard. The dichotomy between the pace and stress level of her day and mine
meant that I was, more often than not, feeling guilty about not helping her
more.  At the same time, if I did stay an extra 15 minutes after lunch to help
her get a particularly fussy child to nap I felt guilty to my employer and team
for not being back at my desk and working. The reality is that, as a remote
worker, I assume the rest of my team thinks I'm relaxing in a hammock with a
cocktail if I'm unavailable for a few minutes. I'm not sure how to assuage that
guilt.

## Helpful Tools

1. [ChromeBox](https://www.google.ca/chrome/business/solutions/for-meetings.html).

    Our company was sent a set of ChromeBox units for free as part of a trial
    program. They are, without a doubt, excellent for holding meetings with remote
    employees.

2. [HipChat](https://www.hipchat.com/). 

    We started using HipChat internally and the area where it excels is group to
    group communication. HipChat makes it effortless to jump into a different teams
    chat and ask a quick question.

## Not So Helpful Tools

1. Google Hangouts. 

    This is a tough item to put on the list because it is so great at what it is
    meant to do -- one to one video chat. Unfortunately, when you get more than one
    person in the same Hangout and that Hangout is being shared on a projector it
    quickly degrades into a useability problem. I dare not count the number of
    minutes and hours wasted getting Hangouts to properly  share the presenters
    screen or to get the proper microphone unmuted for a presentation.

2. Pen and Paper. Whiteboards.

    By far my most used and most useful communication tool is
    rendered useless by remote work. I'm the type of person that needs time writing,
    reading and thinking to come up with solutions to a problem. By
    stripping those tools away during remote meetings I found it very
    difficult to contribute to joint discussions in a meaningful way.

## Qualities of a Remote Worker

Remote working is not for everyone. Although I can't claim to have any authority
on the subject I did compile a list of qualities that make a successful remote
worker.

1. Action Oriented

    A great remote worker needs to gravitate towards taking action rather than
    waiting for instruction. Being remote implies that you may not always be up to
    date on the discussions and decisions being made in the office. At times it is
    up to you to pick up a task and start working on it.

2. Able to Prioritize Independently

    Closely linked to being action oriented is the ability to prioritize. Not being
    privy or available for every in office conversation means you need to be able to
    judge independently what tasks are high priority. It's important to note that
    you *may be wrong* in your choice of tasks. As long as you have some level of
    trust with your manager or employer and you aren't too far off the mark this
    shouldn't be an issue.

3. Strong Written Communicator

    As a remote worker one of your primary communication channels is e-mail. Being a
    strong writer complements so many other professional attributes that you really
    cannot value this enough. It's my opinion that every knowledge worker should be
    comfortable writing and presenting their ideas.

## Qualities of a Remote Manager

Remote work is not for every job. The remote employee's job should be well
defined with clear goals. There also must be some level of trust between the
employee and the employer. In the end, you are a professional and it is up to
you to act as a professional no matter where you are working. That said, there
are a few qualities that the employer needs to bring to the table as well.

1. Trust

    The employer has to trust their employee to get the job down to the best of
    their ability. You hired the person to begin with so some level of trust must be
    present. The trust level cannot be different for remote and in office workers.

2. Planning

    The product manager is generally responsible for determining the project goals
    and how they are prioritized. Remote workers need a manager with a strong
    ability to distill and communicate the project goals so that the worker can
    independently choose tasks without unnecessary communication barriers.

## Summary

I really enjoyed my time as a remote worker, but equally enjoy being back in the
office. Things are not better or worse in either case. Just different.
